Hi there.
This is Lulu.
And welcome back.
Let's now look at the collection operations which are represented by the collect methods.
And these are overloaded methods.
And as the name implies, the collect methods are used to collect a stream of elements into a container.
Container can be something like a list or a set or a map or any regular object.
It need not be a data structure like a list or a set.
It can be any regular object, and so it has to be a container.
And the collect methods are very important and are also very interesting.
They are very important because it is very common to collect a stream of elements into something like
a list.
And they are also very interesting because we can also group the stream of elements into something like
a map so we can do grouping and we can also do some complex grouping like within a map.
The value need not be a single value.
It can also be another data structure like a list.
So we can do some interesting stuff and we can do all of this in a very elegant way because we are using
declarative style of programming.
So it's going to be very interesting and it's a very important lecture on this concept called mutable
reduction is also associated with the collect method, and it's also very important.
So let's go ahead and look at what the collection operations are.
And we have a series of lectures dedicated to just the collect method.
So we are going to explore the collect method in a very detailed way because it's a very important method.
And from the earlier lecture, we know that reduction operations can be of two types and one of them
is represented by the reduced methods and the other by the collect methods.
So the collection operations are also a type of reduction operations.
But the reduction that the collect method does is referred to as mutable reduction.
And the one that the reduced method does is immutable reduction.
So what we have seen earlier with the reduction operations with the reduced method was immutable reduction.
So by design, reduce method would perform immutable reduction, whereas by design collect methods would
do something called mutable reduction.
And this distinction between reduce and collect is very important.
And a lot of sources do not explain this distinction in a clear way.
And because of that, developers can be confused about the reduced method, and they might misuse the
reduced method by using mutable reduction.
So they might use reduce with the mutable reduction.
In fact, in the last lecture when we were dealing with the third version of the reduced method, which
had the three parameters like the identity, the Combiner and the accumulator, we actually misused
the reduced method.
We used a mutable reduction and that's not right.
And if we do that, we can end up with incorrect result or inefficient results.
So we are going to look at this distinction between the reduced methods and the collect methods.
And so it is a very important lecture.
And we know that the reduced method reduces the stream into a single value.
And it can be used to do things like summing the stream.
Elements are finding a maximum or the minimum.
And the current method is used to reduce the stream into a single container, and the container can
be a collection like a list or a set or a map, or it can also be an object like string builder, or
it can also be something called as a summary object.
And a summary object essentially summarizes the stream through different summary values.
So it is a container object.
Now, for instance, if the stream is a stream of numbers, then the summary object can have a list
of summary values like a sum or average or a maxima or minima.
And all of that would be encapsulated in this thing called as a summary object.
And as we mentioned earlier, the reduction performed by the collect method is the notable reduction.
And this is a slide from the earlier lecture.
This is how the Reduce method works.
So we are reducing a stream of elements into a single value, which is 15.
So the plus operation is being applied here.
So that's the reduction operation and that's the accumulator function.
And that is being repetitively applied on the stream elements.
And this is an immutable reduction.
And finally, we are getting the value of 15.
And this is how the collect method works.
So the collect method reduces the stream into a container.
So at the top we have the stream elements five, one and three.
And at the bottom we have the container, which has the elements five, one and three.
So we start off with the container, which we can see at the top.
And a is nothing but the accumulator function.
And just like in the case of the reduced method, the accumulator function is also applied repetitively
in different steps.
So in the first step, it takes an empty container on the first element five, and then it mutates the
empty container.
And with that, we have the container with the value file.
And in the second iteration, which is the second step of the accumulation process, the container with
the value five will be combined with the value one, which is an extreme element.
And hence the container is once again mutated to get the value five and one.
So it has the value 511 and that same container will be used once again in the third step and it will
be accumulated with the value three.
And so the final mutated container will have the values five, one and three.
So the same container is being used here and it is being repetitively mutated with each step of the
accumulation.
So that's what is happening here.
And so we need a supplier here because we have to create this container.
So the beginning of the accumulation process, we need to create the container.
And for that we use a supplier and supplier we know is a functional interface which can be used to create
new objects.
Right.
And the accumulator is another function which does the accumulation process.
And finally, if we are dealing with a parallel stream, we also need a combiner because we can consider
this whole process of accumulation as being done in one segment when we are dealing with the parallel
stream, because parallel stream is going to partition the elements into different segments.
So in this case, we will have one container, one accumulated value, which is a container.
In this case it has a values five, one and three.
And we will also have other segments, and those segments will also have similar containers and we would
have to combine them.
And for that we need the combined function.
So the container function is going to combine the accumulated containers from each of the segments.
So each of the segments will have their own containers.
So now let's head over to my editor to look at the mutable redaction process and the correct method.
Here we are in the stream operations class, in the overloaded reductions method, which we have seen
earlier.
In this method, we had the two methods, the two versions of the reduced methods, the second version
and the third version.
And here is the second version and here is the third version.
And earlier we said that the third version in the third version, we have used mutable reduction and
we shouldn't have done that.
So you're going to focus on that method.
And so these are all the things that we are going to do in this particular demo.
So I want to begin with reiterating on the two overloaded reduced methods.
So I just want to bring a little bit more clarity on the two versions when we have to use one of them.
So we are going to look at that.
And I'm also going to focus more on the reduce method on the third version of the reduced method.
And we will also look at something called the Stream API design principle.
And finally we will look at the reduce with the mutable reduction and the issues that we have with that.
So we are going to look at that and from there we are going to look at the collect methods.
So these are some of the things that we are going to look at.
So it's going to be an in-depth demonstration.
So here we had the grades and we were reducing these grades.
Here we were simply concatenating.
So this is the second version of the reduced method.
Here it is.
So it takes an identity and it takes a binary operator.
In this case, the binary operator is simply performing the concatenation.
So here as the stream source, we are just the stream source is an array.
So the binary operator takes two parameters of the same type and produces an output of the same type.
So here we are concatenating two strings and the output is also another string.
Now with regards to the third reduced method, so it takes an identity and an accumulator like in the
case of the second version, but it also takes a combiner.
Now the real difference between the second and the third version is that the accumulator here is a bi
function.
So earlier in the second version about it's a it's a byte, it's a binary operator, but here it is
a bi function which takes two parameters of two different types and produces an output of one of the
types.
So binary with binary operator, it's of the same type.
The two parameters are of the same times.
So here in the third version, it is taking a string builder and a string and it is generating a string
builder.
So it's taking two elements of two different types.
So that's the main difference.
So if you are facing a scenario where you have the parameters with two different types, then you would
have to go with this reduced version.
But if the parameters will have the same type, then you can use the second version here and both of
them will work with parallel streams.
But in case of this one, when we are dealing with the parallel streams, then we would have to use
a combiner function because in the parallel stream we are going to have different segments and each
of these segments will produce a single string builder in this case, and we need to combine them.
And the accumulator cannot be used here because the types are different with this accumulator.
But in case of a parallel stream, each of the segments will produce an accumulated value of the type
string builder.
So we need to combine the two accumulator values which are of the same type.
And so we have to use this combiner.
Right.
So that's the main thing.
So the main difference between the two functions is the accumulator function and one of them it has
the same type and but in the other one we have different types.
And if you have to use an accumulator which needs two different types, then you have to go with this
one.
Now, the second thing is, if you think about it, we actually do not need this combiner if we are
dealing with a sequential stream rather than a parallel stream now with a sequential stream, what happens
is we have a single segment right where we are creating the string builder and then we are appending
a string and that is done repetitively until we process all of the stream elements.
And finally a string builder is written.
So we do not need this particular combiner function which combines two different string builders, so
we don't need that.
So you might ask why not have two different versions of the reduced method, one for sequential stream
and one for parallel stream?
It's a normal question and we can ask that.
But the thing is, the language designers wanted to have the stream API to be agnostic to the underlying
type of stream.
So they wanted.
The API to not differentiate between sequential and parallel streams.
So that's the design principle that the stream API offers and that's what they wanted.
And the benefit of that is let's take an example.
Let's say that we are having the stream and installed.
So we are just having a variable which takes the stream.
And let's say we have another method which actually does the reduction in that method.
We are doing the reduce.
And that method will accept the stream.
So within that method, let's assume that we have that other fictitious reduced method, which has only
two parameters and it does the reduction.
Now later, after some time, if the developer changes the stream into a parallel stream because it's
very easy to change the stream into a parallel stream.
And once you do that, then it's not going to work if the parallel stream is going to be passed to that
method, which uses the reduced method, which works with only sequential stream, then it's going to
fail.
So the language designers wanted to avoid that by making sure that the API is not does not differentiate
between sequential and parallel streams.
So even if we change it to a stream, if we change it to a parallel stream, then the rest of the pipeline
should, should not change and everything should work perfectly.
So that's the thing.
And but another thing is, although the Combiner function is not being used here for a sequential stream,
but in a future version, the COMBINER could also be used for even for a sequential stream.
So because that is an implementation detail and the language designers might decide that the reduced
method can also use the Combiner function in order to improve the performance.
But that's an implementation detail and implementations can change with any version of of the JDK.
So we never know.
Now one other thing is here.
This combiner cannot be null OC So let's just test that even for a sequential since this is a sequential
stream.
Now if we run it, as we can see, we are getting an Al Pointer exception.
So it cannot be null.
So just keep that in mind.
Now let's also test the design principle itself.
So let's just change this into a parallel stream.
So this is a method from the from the stream interface which it inherits from the parallel stream,
from the base stream stream extents based stream.
So it's coming from there.
So let's just change this.
And as we can see, the output is still A, A and B.
So this is cat one.
This is the concrete one.
So let's do the same thing with also the third version of the reduced method.
And now you can see that here contact to has a different output so it doesn't have the same output.
Let me run it one more time.
Once again, you can see a different output and we are not getting A and B, so as soon as we have changed
it to parallel, so the output has blown up.
So we are not getting the same output.
So that tip that I want to suggest is whenever you are working with streams, always test your output
with a parallel stream.
So in order to test for correctness, you should also make it parallel and you should test that you
have the same output, otherwise you might end up having an incorrect result like the way we are seeing
here.
So always try to test with a parallel stream.
It might work.
It might give you the correct result with a sequential stream, but it might give a wrong result with
the parallel stream.
And in future you might actually convert it into a parallel stream to so make sure it also works with
So that's the design principle is clear here.
But in this case, the reason we have this error is because read use method here is use is doing a mutable
reduction.
So here what is happening is this is a container, the string builder is a container and here we are
making it parallel, which means that we have multiple segments.
The the method is going to partition the.
Elements into two groups and it's our three groups, so it's going to use the different course.
And for all these course, we'll share the same container.
So the same container will be used for all of them.
And so there needs to be a coordination between the threads and here the string builder is not thread
safe, there's going to be a race condition and because of that we can see incorrect results.
So that's one of the main things.
And another thing is, once the accumulation is done, the combining function has to combine the containers.
And in this case we have a single container and we are going to combine the same container.
So we are going to combine the same container with itself.
So because of that, we also have this problem of incorrect result.
So it's just the two cases.
One is the string builder is not safe.
And the second issue is also the combiner function itself.
So that's the thing.
So we are mutating the same container and it's not safe.
So that's the main problem and we should not be using a reduced method for this.
Reduce method is only for for doing immutable detection.
So if you look at the reduced method, it says it uses a bi function.
But next we are going to look at the collect method.
It uses a by consumer.
And when we say consumer, consumer does not return anything.
And so it is naturally designed for mutating the container.
So let's go ahead and look at that.
Also, let me just copy this whole thing.
Here we have this method called as mutable reduction.
So here I'm going to demonstrate the collect method.
So it's just the same thing.
So let me just change this to collect.
Now with colored, we said that we need a supplier.
Earlier in the lecture, we said we need a supplier here because that's the first parameter.
So if I hover here, it says we need a supplier and we need an accumulator and we also need a combiner,
but it is a supplier, so it's a functional interface.
So we cannot just create an object, but we need to pass either an method reference or a lambda.
So let's since it's a supplier, let's pass.
This supplier has a method called get and all the supplier does is create a new instance of string builder.
And so this is also a parallel stream.
So here within each segment, a container is going to be created.
So each segment will have its own container and the rest of the things is just the same.
So let me just copy the print statement to here.
Let me just uncomment this.
So we are invoking the mutable reduction from the main method.
Let's go back.
And we're on this.
So as you can see, it prints A, A and B, this one is printing wrong.
So let me also change this back to just a normal sequential stream and let's just test the output here.
So once again, it's just the same output.
So we're getting the same output, whether it is a sequential stream or whether it is a parallel stream.
So so we need to use the colored method and the colored method like we see here.
It also has an accumulator, it also has a combiner, but it takes a supplier.
And but more importantly, the accumulator here is a bike consumer.
Whether I use it was a by function, a buy function returns a value, whereas a by consumer does not
return anything.
It just has the method accept which which does not return anything.
It has a void.
So one of the parameters has to be a container which is being accumulated.
Which is which is being mutated.
So that's the thing.
Now, there is also a version here.
We can make this mutable reduction work with a reduce by doing this.
So here what we are doing is this is almost the same.
Everything is same.
It's just that here, instead of just saying as a pen, so instead of just working on this particular
parameter, which is the container, we are creating a new container.
Here it is.
And then we are appending the string builder.
This one, because there are two open methods, overloaded methods.
One of them can take a string builder and the other can take a string.
So in this case, we are using both of the overloaded methods, one, to append a string builder and
the other two append the string itself.
So but the issue with this.
So this will generate the correct output.
Let me run it.
Here.
This one also has parallel.
Here it is.
And it is still producing a B.
Cat three.
It's called cat three.
And we are printing cat three here.
But the problem with this is we have these different accumulation steps and each of them is creating
a new string builder.
So that's an inefficient thing.
So we are not mutating the same string builder, but we are creating a new string builder with each
step.
So that's the difference with the collect method.
So this method is, although it gives the correct result, it is still inefficient.
So that's that's about it.
So this is the first version of the correct method, and it has all of this.
There is also a simplified version which is the overloaded collect method.
Let's.
And that will be discussed in the next lecture.
But let's just use it here.
So instead of having all of these three parameters functions, we can just say collectors.
Collectors is a class in the Java utility stream.
It's, it's a helper class and it provides some pre-defined types called as collectors.
And those collectors can help us achieve this kind of a functionality.
So there is a collector for doing this kind of a job and it's called as joining call joining and.
So joining on collectors.
Let me import that.
This actually returns a string.
So that's what it is.
So this joining does pretty much what we are doing here.
And there are also collectors for other purposes.
And like, for example, if you want to generate collect the stream into into a list, then we have
something for that.
And if you want to group the stream elements, we have another method for that, another static factory
method for that called grouping by and we can use that.
So let me just run this now.
Here it is.
So once again here, contact with joining is also giving us the same result, even though it's a parallel
stream.
So that's the thing.
So these are the two collect methods and we will explore more about these collectors in the next lecture.
But we have an idea now about how to use it.
So that's about it.
Thank you and hope you enjoyed learning about the collect method and the mutable reduction.
And that's about it.
Thank you and happy coding.